## Data Wrangling Using R

During this course we provide a comprehensive practical introduction to data wrangling using R. In particular, we focus on tools provided by R's tidyverse, including `dplyr`, `tidyr`, `purrr`, etc. Data wrangling is the art of taking raw and messy data and formating and cleaning it so that data analysis and visualization etc may be performed on it. Done poorly, it can be a time consuming, laborious, and error-prone. Fortunately, the tools provided by R's tidyverse allow us to do data wrangling in a fast, efficient, and high-level manner, which can have dramatic consequence for ease and speed with which we analyse data. We start with how to read data of different types into R, we then cover in detail all the `dplyr` tools such as `select`, `filter`, `mutate`, etc. Here, we will also cover the pipe operator (`%>%`) to create data wrangling pipelines that take raw messy data on the one end and return cleaned tidy data on the other. We then cover how to perform descriptive or summary statistics on our data using `dplyr`'s `summarize` and `group_by` functions. We then turn to combining and merging data. Here, we will consider how to concatenate data frames, including concatenating all data files in a folder, as well as cover the powerful SQL-like join operations that allow us to merge information in different data frames. The final topic we will consider is how to "pivot" data from a "wide" to "long" format and back using `tidyr`'s `pivot_longer` and `pivot_wider`.

## Topics Covered

**Topic 1:** Reading in data. We will begin by reading in data into R using tools such as `readr` and `readxl`. Almost all types of data can be read into R, and here we will consider many of the main types, such as csv, xlsx, sav, etc. Here, we will also consider how to control how data are parsed, e.g., so that they are read as dates, numbers, strings, etc.

**Topic 2:** Wrangling with `dplyr`. We will next cover the very powerful `dplyr` R package. This package supplies a number of so-called "verbs" — `select`, `rename`, `slice`, `filter`, `mutate`, `arrange`, etc. — each of which focuses on a key data manipulation tools, such as selecting or changing variables. All of these verbs can be chained together using "pipes" (represented by `%>%`). Together, these create powerful data wrangling pipelines that take raw data as input and return cleaned data as output. Here, we will also learn about the key concept of "tidy data", which is roughly where each row of a data frame is an observation and each column is a variable.

**Topic 3:** Summarizing data. The `summarize` and `group_by` tools in `dplyr` can be used with great effect to summarize data using descriptive statistics.

**Topic 4:** Merging and joining data frames. There are multiple ways to combine data frames, with the simplest being "bind" operations, which are effectively horizontal or vertical concatenations. Much more powerful are the SQL-like "join" operations. Here, we will consider the `inner_join`, `left_join`, `right_join`, `full_join` operations. In this section, we will also consider how to use `purrr` to read in and automatically merge large sets of files.

**Topic 5:** Pivoting data. Sometimes we need to change data frames from "long" to "wide" formats. The R package `tidyr` provides the tools `pivot_longer` and `pivot_wider` for doing this.